---
layout:  post
title: "Why be a Relativist"
subtitle: "Realist or relativist?"
author:  "Nathan Cheever"
date: 2022-11-10
published: false
categories: [Writing]
---

### Cynic or Realist?

The 1989 movie ["The Dead Poet's Society"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_Poets_Society) is a film about a late-1950's male prep-school in new England: Welton Academy. The administration is puritanical, the teachers are severe and mechanical, and the surroundings austere. And the uniformed young men attending are under considerable pressure to perform and go on to Ivy League schools. 
    
A new English teacher, Mr. John Keating, is a ray of hope. He is different. He challenges the boys to "seize the day!" and to always look at the world from different viewpoints. In one class, he tells the boys to rip out an essay at the front section of their poetry books which told the boys how to measure the greatness of a poem. "Rip! Shred! Tear! Rip it out!" Amidst the glee of ripping from the textbooks, another teacher, Mr. McAllister barges in. "What the hell is going on here?!" When he sees Mr. Keating present, he awkwardly withdraws.

Later that night at the dining hall there is an interesting interchange between John Keating and Mr. McAllister:

> MCALLISTER: "You take a big risk by encouraging them to become artists, John. When they realize that they're not Rembrandts, Shakespeares, or Mozarts, they'll hate you for it."  
> KEATING: "We're not talking artists George we're talking free-thinkers."  
> MCALLISTER: "[chuckling] Free-thinkers at seventeen!"  
> KEATING: "Funny. I never pegged you as a cynic."  
> MCALLISTER: "I'm not a cynic. I'm a realist."[^1]  

I would like to focus on that last remark from McAllister for this piece. What does it mean to be a realist? How do we become one?

----------------

To proclaim yourself a realist is a defense and a compliment. Realism is the refuge of cynics. It expresses a willingness and ability to see and talk about the world as it really is. It is to be a grown-up. It is a vote of confidence in one's ability to handle what is, no matter what. It is a promissory note to truth to be revealed. It is a posture that prizes reality, what is, over what wish. No flights of fancy, no sentimentalism, just "fact, fact, fact!"[^2]

Nobody says "I am an non-realist". Even the most romantic and idealistic believe themselves to be, in their core, realists. Their lives, their rites, their beliefs, all point to that which they take to be real.


###  Two important truths
From these observations, I see two points: 
1. **We naturally seek truth.** We do not deliberately want to be deceived anymore that we want to be sick. To orient from the compass, to draw towards light, to want clarity instead of confusion – this striving is an essential quality of human nature.
2. With the diversity of opinions, religions, philosophies, and beliefs, especially in how they clash and collide into each other, **not all realists can be right.** 

These two truths, like two parents, one of human nature, the other of human reason, have combined and intermixed to produce all kinds of movements, theories, and efforts of human spirit throughout history. 

One can see at least three types of this offspring: 

#### Fighting with fist
The first being war: a physical power-struggle of one reality against another. Forced recantations, inquisitions, animosity, even holy war. This is the reduction of the opposite belief by a reduction of the opposition itself.

#### Fighting with word
Another type is debate and argument, each side using reason and rhetoric to convince, persuade, or confound the other. This is the non-violent route of a Socrates, Jesus, and the parliament chamber. Rational debate to vicious propaganda: this is the war of words and ideas.

#### Departure
And then there is another type, much more devastating than the first and just as capable of convincing as the second. This type is not an iteration on second point, but an attack on the first (the seeking of truth). It is the void. It dissolves the idealist/cynic/realist debate by denying the premise of real truth. 

The previous two types represent strategies in the battle for truth. The last just nukes the battlefield.

### The Subjectivism Approach
Let's look closer at this last approach. It is the philosophy of the personal-sized truth. It declares all ideas of morality, knowledge, or truth are merely subjective. The experiences, genetics, prejudices, and preferences of the subject – me – are all that is to be said. All ideas of morality, knowledge, or truth are is an individual's mental projections, nothing more. This is subjectivism.

Is this the new realism?
Have we moved closer to reality? 

What has been achieved by this approach? Both a liberation and great reduction.  

The liberation is felt immediately. What a triumphant feeling to say "No" to all burdensome beliefs. To stand apart institutions and tradition and say, "You won't pull the wool over my eyes any more!" What freedom! What victory for individualism! Every person is on equal ground: no one person can dictate value towards anyone. Its ethos is "you do you".

The reduction, the less-ness of subjectivism, takes longer to set in. 

**We lose all hierarchy**  
We tell ourselves to "look within" for our deepest truth; to trust our feelings as our guide. with no guide or wisdom of _which_ feelings or instincts to follow. Feelings are always urgent when they manifest, eagerly competing for attention. Buying this philosophy of feelings as our practical guide is
Obeying your feelings "is like telling us to obey 'people'. People say different things: so do [feelings]."[^3]

When I feel anger the strongest, I won't _feel_ anything else to restrain myself. Should I even restrain myself? Wouldn't that be inauthentic to my feelings? We're flirting now with questions of moral values.
Any sort of hierarchy of higher and lower feelings, not to mention duties have been lost in our reduction. Sure, we could make up one on our own, but that would be subject to the fickleness of our feelings. And how could something so fickle be the only truth there is?

When it eventually does, we realize we sold a panopoly of truths, once held dear but now held as worthless, for one obscure paltry truth.
That we rejected the community feast preferring the freedom to forage on our own.
That we exchanged an elaborate and awesome dogma for a stale one. 
But it is dogma all the same.
We are zealots who defected to a more appealing camp, yet zealots nonetheless.

What tools is one left with? Doubt of everything except doubt itself.

Is persuasion possible among subjectivists? To what external yardstick can they both appeal? One's only choice is to get them to _feel_ the way you do, since feelings are the individual's compass.

Is subjectivism a robust philosophy for life? No. It is a forfeiture of the quest for truth. It is self-contradictory: even in denying an objective reality he points to it. One cannot jump away from the ground without pushing off it. 

Digging into the meaning of the word, I find more cause for worry with subjectivism.
It's already off to a bad start with its definition that all there is is _individual_ projection. This places all the credit on each subject for all their evaluations and projections. Yet it is no secret that as social creatures we typically accept others' views and beliefs. These "mental projections" would not really be an individuals own personal projections but more like a resonance or a reflection of a shared concept. In this way, the skepticism referred to as subjectivism would do better as relativism (where truth is only a truth for a given time, place, and/or culture). So for subjectivism to be _objectively_ real (ironies aside for now), every person, all seven+ billion of us, would need to hold their own unique distinct views, not shared with anyone. This is impossible, and therefore pure subjectivism is impossible. 

So let's rebrand as relativists.

### Why be a relativist
So why would anyone be a relativist?
The reasons to reject the reality of an absolute truth are not hard to find. It is a profound skepticism. With so many conflicting 'truths', how could any be right? How could we know it?
To the Relativist any absolutist is an annoying know-it-all. How condescending!
How unscientific, how bigoted, inflexible and narrow-minded! One truth sounds like one tyrant: oppressive, unfeeling and ignorant. It serves only to justify itself; to bend reality into fitting the foreordained narrative and to disfigure and disavow what cannot fit.

When you see universal truth like a universal pavement compactor - something that flattens dissent, diversity, and quality into sameness - to be a relativist is to take a stand for variety. It is to remind oneself and society how sure we once were, how certain we were in our realism that now lies debunked and discredited. They are the world's memory. "Remember," they say, "you were once so certain and were duped before! Don't be so sure now! Keep your ideas of truth in their proper contexts, and remember that truth is only a product of its surroundings, nothing more." 

In their skepticism lies a profound sense of caution, if not modesty. 

Perhaps they haven't read Plato, Aristotle, or Nietzsche but they don't want to feel like they have to spend years reading dense dusty philosophical thought only to reaffirm what they already know. What's the use? Besides, it's so old-fashioned, outdated, and unnecessary. 

But it's more than that. It's an unnecessary risk. After all, you could be duped again!

### How being a relativist breaks down
Yet even in a rejection of an absolute truth we still are subject to our human nature. Namely, relativism is the only viable truth left after all other attempts at authoritarian forms of truth have been debunked or suspected. In our distaste for error and our efforts to be fair, we are now only certain of uncertainty. 

Yet this position is in contradiction to itself.
It holds an intention of seeking something, namely truth, like a vacationer holds an intention of wanting to go to Disneyland. 
One orients themself to where they want to go.
The relativist wants to avoid disappointment, deception, and among their more noble qualities, protect others from levling. But we must ask why they hold these ends as desirable? And what hierarchy or framework do they rely on to hold these judgements as objective? 
Despite the quest for honesty, the relativist hasn't gone all the way to ask why the need for honesty. <<Hume's is ought???>> 

The relativist is mostly dislodged but not entirely cut off from the Tao. The relativist position is still twinged by shadows of value. Better rebrand again as a nihilist.

### Why be a nihilist
_Nihil_ is Latin for nothing. A nihilist is someone who believes in nothing. They completely reject the first point, and believe there are no moral foundations, no meaning or point to life. No religious, traditional or scientific principle can exist or ever be known. This is full-throttle skepticism.

If correct, it implies that life has no purpose, everything is just random, our behavior choices have no meaning, there is no objective value, no justice. The only thing that is real is that nothing is real.

How did we end up here? 

I suppose the years of being lied too, put upon, oppressed by religious or political figures can make someone look at the structures, institutions, and belives they once relied upon and curse them for their betrayal. That horrible vulnerability, that child-like trust, once so shattered, is never to be repaired. Trust, hope, believe are unguarded gates that must be blocked against. They don't just chose to not believe again, but like Oedipus, destroy the organs wherewith they can believe, blasting their nature from seeing meaning so that nothing can lay hold ofo them again. It is the effort of man to make himself an animal; to extirpate reason, hope, meaning until all that's left is want, necessity, and instinct. These types usually don't stay with us long.

### How being a nihilist breaks down
Apart from the awfulness of such an existence, such existential claims also run into paradoxes. If nihilists are right in saying that there is no universal truth that gives purpose to human life, would they not then be supplying such a universal truth?

But this is the final stop on the skepticism train. 

Alonog the way we've uncovered the self-defeating claims of skepticism. "Everything is relative", if taken for truth, consists of an absolutist statement. "There is no objective truth, only subjective projection," also makes an objective truth claim.

But these aren't just fun little logical exercises or games. They not only pull us away from the traditional belief in an objective value but they enervate our ability to deal with the eventual realizations of their folly. Once you realize that relativism fails, how do you deal with that fact, if you've so weakened your trust, familiarity and ability to deal with point 2?

### So what?
That is what this is for!
I 


[^1]: From the movie, "The Dead Poet's Society"
[^2]: Dickens, Charles. "Hard Times"
[^3]: C.S. Lewis _The Abolition of Man_, pg 35
